# Introductory Questions

## Why study Stoicism?

Stoicism is a philosophy primarily concerned with finding the best way to live one's life, in figuring out how to [flourish as human beings](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eudaimonia). It is one of a family of such philosophies developed in the [Hellenistic period](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hellenistic_period) of Mediterranean history. [Stoicism](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stoicism)’s rivals included [Epicureanism](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Epicureanism), [Skepticism](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Academic_skepticism), [Peripateticism](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peripatetic_school), and [Cynicism](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cynicism_(philosophy\)), each of which was similar to Stoicism in some ways, and different in others.

## Is Stoicism something I have to believe in, or commit my life to?

Although the historical sources sometimes emphasize the importance of dedicating one's life to philosophy, in practice many find benefit in doing no more than reading Stoic writing as inspirational material, particularly Marcus Aurelius's Meditations and Epictetus's Enchiridion. (In both cases, they are easily misinterpreted without further study, but this may actually be helpful in letting the reader dig out a meaning that can be incorporated into their existing approach to life.)

No modern person "believes" in orthodox classical Stoicism as a whole, in the way one might believe in a religion. Even at its height, different individual Stoics appear to have felt free to diverge from their predecessors and contemporaries when their own judgement differed. Modern circumstances result in even more diversity; much of the content of the philosophy has been lost with time, and much of what has survived requires updating to accommodate modern science.

When it was a living school, it was taught in person from one generation to the next. It actively changed over hundreds of years from Ancient Greece to imperial Rome. It's like a house built many generations ago, then burned down and left to rot for a hundred years. What we have left is some of the foundation, occasional stories about the people who lived there, and pictures with people in out of date hats.

All we can do is make educated guesses about how people really lived in it. A modern "Stoic" can try and reconstruct it as a museum piece, trying to be as accurate in every detail as possible, but I doubt any modern person would want to live there. Alternately, one might try to renovate it, rebuilding it with modern materials and appliances but trying to remain faithful to the character of the original. Finally, one can study it, trying to find its strengths, and build something new, or use it as inspiration for new additions and other modifications to their existing homes.

Many from Renaissance times onward have found at least the last approach valuable.

## What is Stoicism, considered as a philosophy of life in modern times?

Stoicism is a philosophy of life, a practical guide to applying wisdom to your daily choices, focused on living life as a thriving rational being, characterized by excellence in judgement and the fulfilled happiness that is to the mind what robust healthy fitness is to the body. Stoics believe that, just as physical pain is caused by illness and injury to the body, human distress is caused (at least in part, and according to orthodox Stoicism, entirely) by mistaken judgements and incorrect beliefs, particularly about good and bad. To wholly correct these judgements and correct these beliefs is a difficult task, perhaps effectively impossible, but Stoic study, practice, and exercises aim at least to improve those of the Stoics who practice them.

The details of Stoic beliefs and practices have varied significantly over time and by individual, but there are some common, fundamental elements.  In classical (ancient Greek and Roman) times, there were Early, Middle, and Late periods, each of which had distinctive features. From the enlightenment onwards, there have been philosophers sufficiently influenced by the classical Stoics either to describe themselves as Stoic (Lawrence Becker) or be described by knowledgeable scholars as Stoic ([Anthony Ashley Cooper, 3rd Earl of Shaftesbury](http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/shaftesbury/)).

Common central themes of philosophy labeled "Stoic" include:

 * Virtue (excellence of character or moral beauty) is the only good; departures from virtue (vice) the only evils.
   * Some things are up to us, a consequence only of our character; everything else is not up to us, and independent of our character. Things which we appear only to influence can and should be separated into factors that are entirely up to us, and entirely independent of us. "Virtue", in English translations of Greek philosophy, can either be a translation of [ἀρετή/arete](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arete), literally excellence, or (in context) excellence of character; or it might refer to being κάλος/kalos, literally beautiful, or (in context) morally beautiful. The Stoics thought that the two amounted to the same thing.
   * External events are not features of our character, and so can be neither good nor bad.
   * There are four basic virtues (properties of an excellent character): [justice](https://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/64488/pg64488-images.html#section337), [prudence](https://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/64488/pg64488-images.html#section336), [courage](https://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/64488/pg64488-images.html#section338), and [self-control](https://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/64488/pg64488-images.html#section343). (These virtues were interpreted broadly, and many other virtues were considered sub-categories of these four. For a list, see the *Stoic Ethics* by Arius Didymus, collected in Stobaeus 5b2, for example in *The Stoics Reader* p. 125.) With these virtues, a person knows what to do, exercises good judgement in how to do it, and acts on this judgement without being deterred by fear or desire.
 * It is not things that disturb us, but our judgements about those things.
   * Virtue is necessary and sufficient for [eudaimonia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eudaimonia) (human flourishing, or happiness in life).
   * Passions (πάθος/pathological emotions) are emotions caused or reinforced by a belief that something not up to us is either good or bad; they are symptoms of mistaken beliefs about good and bad. All emotions that influence a person to make decisions contrary to those they would make were they in a calm, detached frame of mind are passions. Most strong emotions experienced by most people are either caused or sustained by judgements of things other than virtue or vice to be good or bad, and so are passions.
   * Feelings, emotions not accompanied by such a belief, may be pleasant or unpleasant, but do not make a person’s life good or bad, or prevent them from making and following decisions according to sound judgement. Examples include reactions to natural beauty, being startled by nearby lightning and other "jump-scares," and responses to music.
   * An impeccable character (Sage) has feelings, but no passions.
 * Virtue consists of acting consistently according to nature.
   * "Nature" is an English stand-in for [φύσις/phusis](https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Physis&oldid=1033453003), which is literally a form of the word "to grow." It usually referred either to the process of ideally healthy maturation, or the ultimate result of this process.
   * As social beings (such as humans) mature, their natural impulses expand from helping themselves alone to their families, cities, nations, the community of all rational beings, and the universe itself; and seeing their individual selves as parts of these larger, interconnected units.
   * The natural impulse of a rational being (such as a human) is to believe what is true, and avoid believing what is false.
   * For the Stoics, acting according to nature did not just mean acting according to human nature ("being an adult" in the idiomatic sense), but in agreement with the Nature of the universe as a whole. This entails not attempting to act contrary to what is physically possible, but does not necessarily entail conformance with what is culturally or legally acceptable. (Indeed, φύσις/phusis was sometimes contrasted with νόμος/nomos, a word for culture, law, and tradition.)

Although these are common characteristics, Stoic philosophy is not simply reducible to these elements: each of these require elaboration for understanding, and these interact with each other and also with characteristics not part of this list. This elaboration and interaction has a significant impact on the overall effect of adopting the philosophy. Differences in interpretation, familiarity with historical context and more obscure Stoic works, selective adaptation, and personal modification of historical Stoicism therefore lead to a substantial variety in the philosophies held by modern people who describe themselves as "Stoic," or who are influenced by Stoicism.

There were a number of Stoic exercises aimed at improvement of character by training the Stoic not to judge externals either good or bad. These  instructions are referred to but not well described by classical literature, and so we must rely on educated guesswork and  reconstructions. What has survived has been influential in the  development of modern psychotherapy techniques, particularly cognitive behavioral therapy.


## What was Stoicism, historically?

Stoicism was a "school" of philosophy in Ancient Greece and Rome. Lessons in a school of philosophy covered a wide curriculum, including both intellectual and practical elements. The ultimate goal of such a school was improvement (or transformation) of one's character. We have records of the names and authors of many of the books studied by Stoics, but the books themselves did not survive the Middle Ages, and the person-to-person tradition ended in 529 CE at the latest. What we do have is second hand accounts from rivals and compilers of encyclopedias, and notes and writings of several late lay Stoics. (Attributions to Epictetus are notes from his student Arrian, and were not written by Epictetus himself. Accounts of Musonius Rufus's teachings are similarly second hand. Seneca and Marcus Aurelius were politicians rather than professional philosophers.)

Stoic education had three parts: Logic, Ethics, and Physics. From Diogenes Laertius's [Lives of Eminent Philosophers](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=Perseus%3Atext%3A1999.01.0258%3Abook%3D7%3Achapter%3D1):

>  [40] Philosophy, they say, is like an animal, Logic corresponding to the bones and sinews, Ethics to the fleshy parts, Physics to the soul. Another simile they use is that of an egg : the shell is Logic, next comes the white, Ethics, and the yolk in the centre is Physics. Or, again, they liken Philosophy to a fertile field : Logic being the encircling fence, Ethics the crop, Physics the soil or the trees. Or, again, to a city strongly walled and governed by reason.
> No single part, some Stoics declare, is independent of any other part, but all blend together.

Because Stoic were [teleological](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Teleology) [pantheist](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pantheism) [materialists](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Materialism), physics included theology. This education included not just knowledge, but also character building. (That is, not just learning about wisdom, but also how to train oneself to act wisely.)

Although it is clear that the other two branches were still taught in late Stoicism, the surviving texts (Marcus Aurelius, Epictetus, Seneca, and Musonius Rufus) are mostly on ethics. The explanation for this emphasis isn't obvious; it may be that the late Roman Stoics placed less emphasis on physics and logic than the Greeks, or it may be that works on ethics were more likely to survive to modern times. There are parts in the surviving texts that indicate later Stoics viewed the physics and logic as being important to study only in so far as they support the development of ethics, but it is unclear if this was a feature of the school from the beginning, a feature common only to the late Roman Stoics, or a feature of the specific late Stoics whose writing has survived.
