## What was the Stoic attitude toward suicide?

The Stoic attitude toward suicide was subtle and complicated, and particularly so to modern readers who are looking for a [deontological ruling](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deontological_ethics) from a [virtue ethics](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Virtue_ethics).  The Stoics did not declare either that suicide was always acceptable or always unacceptable. They  discuss suicide in a number of different passages, in some instances approvingly, and in others disapprovingly. Although there are a few instances where different Stoics appear to have disagreed with each other, in general they are consistent with each other, and their views are a natural consequence of their approach to ethical problems more generally: what is important is the character traits that lead to the action (virtue or vice) rather than the act itself.

The Stoic view may be summarized by a handful of points:

1. **One should behave virtuously and in keeping with their ideal character even when death is a likely consequence.** Stoic literature describes a number of examples in which people act according to what they think is virtuous and in keeping with their proper character, even when threatened with death.
     - [Helvidius Priscus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Helvidius_Priscus) spoke and voted against the instructions of the emperor, even though the emperor threatened to have him executed if he did so ([*Discourses* 1.2](https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Epictetus,_the_Discourses_as_reported_by_Arrian,_the_Manual,_and_Fragments/Book_1/Chapter_2).19-24).
     - An athlete refused to be castrated, even though it meant he would properly die, because preserving his manhood was necessary for keeping his proper character (*Discourses* 1.2.25-28).
     - Epictetus states that he would refuse to shave his beard, even if threatened with execution (*Discourses* 1.2.29). (Having a beard was symbolic of being a philosopher.)
     - [Cato the Younger](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cato_the_Younger) committed suicide rather than be captured at the end of Caesar's civil war. This is interpreted (at least by the Stoics who admired him) as a decision to become a martyr for the Republic, rather than letting Caesar mollify his followers by pardoning him. 
    
    In none of these cases is the admired person seeking death for its own sake, nor out of despair or hopelessness. The Stoics did not regard either avoidance of misery as a legitimate motivation for suicide, nor having achieved complete happiness as a reason not to commit suicide (Cicero's [*On Ends* book 3, ch. 18](https://www.gutenberg.org/files/29247/29247-h/29247-h.html#Pg202)).
    That these suicides were regarded with admiration does not imply that they thought that others should also commit suicide in the same situation. As Cicero put it, "Diversity of character carries with it so great significance that suicide may be for one man a duty, for another [under the same circumstances] a crime." (Cicero's [*On Duties* 1.31](https://www.gutenberg.org/files/47001/47001-h/47001-h.htm#I.112), see also *Discourses* 1.2.5-11.)
2. **One should live as long as one aught, not as long as one can or as long at one pleases.** (Seneca's *Letters* [70](https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Moral_letters_to_Lucilius/Letter_70) and [104](https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Moral_letters_to_Lucilius/Letter_104).)  The same arguments as those used in Seneca's [*Of Peace of Mind* Ch. 4](https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Of_Peace_of_Mind#IV.) concerning passivity apply to suicide as well. If a person has an opportunity to act as a member of their family (Seneca's  [Seneca letter 104](http://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Moral_letters_to_Lucilius/Letter_104)), as a friend, as a citizen of their country, or of humanity as a whole (*Discourses* [II.15](https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Epictetus,_the_Discourses_as_reported_by_Arrian,_the_Manual,_and_Fragments/Book_2/Chapter_15)), they are obligated to do so, and aught not to commit suicide.  Seneca's [Letter 98](https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Moral_letters_to_Lucilius/Letter_98) on when a virtuous person may choose to die: "if he can no longer be of service to anyone." It's important to note that what is relevant is the *opportunity* to act virtuously, not the likelihood of actually acting virtuously. It's a question of whether a person *can* ever be of service again, not whether they think they *will*.  A person who might have the opportunity to act virtuously, but who believes that they are vicious and not likely to actually act virtuously, is still obligated to continue to live (Arius Didymus's *Elements of Stoic Ethics* 11m, Cicero's *On Ends* book 3, ch. 18).
3. **When there will be no future opportunity for future virtuous action, one may choose the method by which one dies.**
    - "Just as I shall select my ship when I am about to go on a voyage or my house when I propose to take a residence, so I shall choose my death when I am about to depart from life." (Seneca's [Letter 70.11](https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Moral_letters_to_Lucilius/Letter_70)). Seneca goes on to give examples of suicides he find admirable, in particular describing several different instances of prisoners who were being sent to die in an arena for the entertainment of Romans, but who found ways to commit suicide beforehand. Note that all of the examples Seneca gives fit the condition he states in [Letter 98.15](https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Moral_letters_to_Lucilius/Letter_98): that they will no longer ever have an opportunity to be of service to anybody.
    - Epictetus prays, "If Thou sendest me to a place where men have no means of living in accordance with nature, I shall depart this life, not in disobedience to Thee, but as though Thou wert sounding for me the recall. I do not abandon Thee—far be that from me! but I perceive that Thou hast no need of me. Yet if there be vouchsafed a means of living in accordance with nature, I will seek no other place than that in which I am, or other men than those who are now my associates." (*Discourse* 3.24.101)
4. **We can take comfort in the possibility of suicide.** Epictetus uses a metaphor of a house filled with smoke for a difficult situation, and reminds us that we can take comfort in our freedom to leave the house when we choose (a metaphor for suicide) (Epictetus's *Discourse* 1.25.14, 4.10.29). Marcus Aurelius repeats this metaphor (*Meditations* 5.29). At first, these statements seem to contradict point 2, but if the context for the passages is examined, we find additional conditions on when they thought we *should* commit suicide. Although they thought that we always *can* commit suicide, and that we can take comfort in this, they did not think that we *should* commit suicide except under specific conditions. These conditions are the same as those expressed in points 2 and 3. In the case of Epictetus (*Discourse* 1.25.14), just before the metaphor of the smokey house, he says he should continue to live "as long as it is beneficial, and that means, as long as I preserve what is becoming and consistent." This amounts to the same thing as being virtuous. In the case of Marcus Aurelius's [*Meditations* 5.29](https://www.gutenberg.org/files/55317/55317-h/55317-h.htm#V_29), it is as long as he is not prevented from living as he intends to depart, which is willing "what agrees with the nature of a reasonable and social creature." Again, the conditions amount to living virtuously.
   
Epictetus's [*Discourse* 1.24.20](https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Epictetus,_the_Discourses_as_reported_by_Arrian,_the_Manual,_and_Fragments/Book_1/Chapter_24) is sometimes interpreted to contradict with point 2, as a statement that it is an appropriate response to life's difficulties. Placing this paragraph in its context as a summation of the whole of *Discourse* 1.24, it becomes clear that suicide is not the response that Epictetus says is appropriate. Rather, he says (1.24.1) that the appropriate response is to regard difficulties the way an athlete regards a challenging training parter: as an opportunity to take advantage of. The concluding paragraph is not an exhortation to suicide, but rather a condemnation of whining.

Similarly, the first few sentences of Marcus Aurelius's *Meditations* 8.50 is sometime taken to contradict point 2:

> Is the gourd bitter? Put it from you. Are there thorns in the way? Walk aside.

Again, the misinterpretation arises from taking the sentences out of context. If one places these sentences in context with the rest of the passage, it becomes clear that these are not metaphors for suicide at all, but only examples of calmly dealing with the business of life rather than complaining about it:

> Is the gourd bitter? Put it from you. Are there thorns in the way? Walk aside. That is enough. Do not add, “Why were such things brought into the world?” The naturalist would laugh at you, just as would a carpenter or a shoemaker, if you began fault-finding because you saw shavings and parings from their work strewn about the workshop. 
 
A challenge in understanding how Stoicism might be applied to a specific situation is in the apparent contraction between points 2 and 3: an essential question is that of how we should judge whether we will have an opportunity to act virtuously? Seneca's *Letter* 70 is clear that absolute certainty is not required. Indeed, because absolute certainty is never really attainable, such a requirement would render point 3 meaningless. In the examples Seneca gives, though, imminent death seems nearly certain. In some passages, it seems like the Stoics expected an omen of some sort (*Discourse* 1.9 and 1.29, Diogenes Laertius's *Lives and Opinions* 7.28), while in others they seems to think it can be inferred from circumstance (*Discourse* 2.15, 3.24.101, *Lives and Opinions* 7.130). There is also a question of the soundness of one's judgement: it can be easy for people who wish to commit suicide to avoid problems or unpleasant situations (e.g. depression, hopelessness, or despair) to convince themselves that they have no future obligations, when it fact they do. This may why the early Stoics said that suicide could be appropriate the wise man (sage), but is never appropriate for a vicious one (someone who is not a sage). While a vicious person might desire to die rather than face some unpleasant situation, a sage never will (Arius Didymus *Elements of Stoic Ethics* 11m, and see the footnote in the translation in Inwood and Gerson's *Stoics Reader*).


